Add surface-governance and assurance specs (docs/specs 001, 002) (#332)
mike-north/vaultkeeper: docs/specs/001-surface-governance.md

integration surfaces. Feature work conforms to it; a surface change that is not also a diff to this spec is a
review failure (§1.4, §2.5).

Grounded in code read from `origin/main` @ `87c615f`: `crates/vaultkeeper-cli/src/main.rs` (clap definitions,
authoritative for the CLI), `packages/vaultkeeper/api-report/vaultkeeper.api.md` and `src/index.ts` (library).
Three registers are kept distinct throughout: **IS** (current inventory), **SHOULD BE** (normative rule),
**BROKEN** (a divergence, §1.3).

---

## Part 1 — CLI Surface

### 1.1 Command tree (normative inventory)

Landed on `origin/main`. `stdin`/`stdout`/`stderr` columns state the contract; `exit` is the success/typed
range. "Secrets" = does a secret value transit this command, and by what channel.

| Command | Positional | Flags | stdin | stdout | Secrets | exit |
|---|---|---|---|---|---|---|
| `exec` | `COMMAND…` (trailing) | `--token <jwe>` | inherited by child | child's | value → child env (`VAULTKEEPER_SECRET`) | child's code |
| `store` | — | `--name <n>`, `--require-presence-per-use` | **secret value** | status line | value ← stdin | 0 / 1 |

> | `delete` | — | `--name <n>`, `--require-presence-per-use` | — | status line | — | 0 / 1 |

Author: Fixed across the file.

grammar review covers them before they land:

| Command | Positional | Flags | Notes |
|---|---|---|---|
| `run` | `COMMAND…` (trailing) | `--profile <n>`, `--profile-file <p>`, `--set <VAR=SECRET>`, `--dry-run`, `--require-presence` | stdio/signal transparent; stdout is the child's alone; **in review** |
| `session redeem` (shape TBD) | — | lease presenter | lease redemption over the #268 handle table; **designed, unscheduled** |

### 1.2 Design grammar (SHOULD BE)

**G1 — Noun-verb for resource families; bare verb for whole-vault process actions.** A command earns a
**noun namespace** (`<noun> <verb>`) when it manages a *category of addressable resources* with more than one
operation: `config`, `backend`, `profile`, `session`. A command is a **bare top-level verb** when it is a
single process action against the vault as a whole with no sibling operations on a shared resource: `exec`,
`run`, `doctor`, `approve`, `dev-mode`.

**G2 — The primary subject is positional; modifiers are flags.** A command's required primary subject — the
resource it acts on — is a **positional argument**. Options, policy toggles, and alternate sources are

> **flags**. `profile show NAME`, `session mint PROFILE`, `approve --path` (see BROKEN-4). A secret value is

Author: Fixed — B4/B5.

### 1.4 Evolution policy (SHOULD BE)

- **E1 — Spec-diff-in-PR.** A PR that adds, removes, or changes a command/subcommand/flag/exit-code **must**
  edit §1.1 and, if it bends a rule, §1.3 in the same PR. A surface change without a spec diff is an
  automatic review block. This is what makes drift visible as a reviewable diff rather than an archaeological
  finding.
- **E2 — Deprecation path.** A removed or renamed flag/command survives one minor release as a hidden alias
  emitting a stderr deprecation notice (never on stdout — G4), then is removed at the next minor. Renames land
  the new spelling and the alias together.
- **E3 — Cross-implementation enforcement.** The native and TS CLIs are one surface; `crates/vaultkeeper-
  conformance` is the mechanical proof of it. Every new command lands with conformance cases so the two CLIs

>   cannot diverge — the surface is enforced by test, not by discipline.

Author: Rejoined as a single code span.

**G1 — Noun-verb for resource families; bare verb for whole-vault process actions.** A command earns a
**noun namespace** (`<noun> <verb>`) when it manages a *category of addressable resources* with more than one
operation: `config`, `backend`, `profile`, `lease` (né `session`, ruling §3.3.1), and (post-B2/B3/B4 adjudication)
`secret`, `key`, `trust`. A command is a **bare top-level verb** only when it is a single process action against the vault as
a whole with no sibling operations on a shared resource — after adjudication, exactly two qualify: `run`
(the launcher) and `doctor` (the whole-machine check).

**G2 — The primary subject is positional; modifiers are flags.** A command's required primary subject — the
resource it acts on — is a **positional argument**. Options, policy toggles, and alternate sources are
**flags**. `profile show NAME`, `session mint PROFILE`, `approve --path` (see BROKEN-4). A secret value is
**never** a positional or a flag value (G6).

**G3 — Flag naming is a stable vocabulary.** A concept has exactly one flag spelling across the whole surface.
`--profile-file` for the explicit-path override, `--json` for machine output, `--profile`/`--entry` for

> profile addressing. The presence family is **one** name (see BROKEN-5).

Author: Flag naming should also be part of a _global vocabulary_ and we should take care to choose the right _level_ where a flag applies. For example `--json` or `--format json` should apply to nearly all commands. `--profile` should be the single flag we use to represent referencing a profile in a flag, etc...

Author: Adopted — G3 is now a global flag vocabulary with defined applicability levels: near-universal (--format/--json), family (--profile as THE profile reference, --require-presence-*), and command-local; new flags must state their level, promotion is a spec change.

**G4 — stdout is data; stderr is diagnostics.** stdout carries *only* the command's payload — a JWE
(`session mint`), a JSON value (`--json`), a name list, or the child's own stream (`exec`/`run`). Every
human-facing message — progress, warnings, the file-only degradation notice, errors — goes to **stderr**.
This is the #279 rule generalized to the whole surface, and it is what makes every data-producing command
pipeable. `--dry-run` and human-report commands print their report to stdout (there is no child to protect),
but a command that emits a machine artifact must never interleave diagnostics into it.

**G5 — `--json` is opt-in and total.** Absent, output is human text. Present, stdout is a **single JSON

> value** and nothing else. `--json` is the only machine-output switch; no command invents a second one.

Author: Absent, we should _detect whether the command is being invoked by an agent (e.g. use [these env variables](https://github.com/mike-north/is-agentic-tui#supported-tools) ) and default to [toon](https://toonformat.dev/) if we detect an agentic TUI, otherwise default to human-readable text. We should incorporate an _output formatter_ to ensure that we separate value generation from value formatting

Author: Adopted — G5 is now the output-formatter rule: generation separated from formatting; --format <human|toon|json>; absent an explicit choice, agentic invocation is detected (is-agentic-tui env catalogue) and defaults to toon, else human text. Implementation filed as its own work item.

**G6 — Secrets never appear in argv.** A CLI-surface invariant, not a per-command choice. A secret value

> enters only via **stdin** (`store`) and leaves only via **stdout** (`session mint` prints a lease, `exec`

Author: ```suggestion
enters only via **stdin** (`store`) and leaves only via **stdout** (`lease issue` prints a lease, `run`
```

Author: Applied as suggested.

> injects into a child's environment). No command accepts a secret as a positional or flag value; `--set

Author: >  No command accepts a secret as a positional or flag value

Let's say _raw secret_ here. Probably best not to toss lease tokens around carelessly either but there's no avoiding that

Author: Done — 'raw secret', with the acknowledgment that lease tokens do travel as values (capabilities, not raw secrets) and still deserve careful handling.

VAR=SECRET` on `run` is the one deliberate exception and is documented as such, marked UNREVIEWED in
`--dry-run`. (Backend implementations honor the same rule downstream, e.g. keychain `store` via `security
-i` stdin.)

**G7 — Exit-code taxonomy.** `0` success; `1` a typed operational failure (the `VaultError` surface, §2.1);

> `2` reserved for clap usage errors; `exec`/`run` **propagate the child's exit code**, and a signal-terminated

Author: ```suggestion
`2` reserved for clap usage errors; `run` **propagate the child's exit code**, and a signal-terminated
```
Can we prune away deprecated (or soon to become deprecated) aliases so the shelf-life of this document is longer

Author: Applied, and generalized: normative rule text now cites only canonical post-adjudication names throughout Part 1; deprecated aliases survive only in the '(was …)' annotations and their B-table rows.

child yields `128+N`. Advisory commands that cannot "fail" (`profile lint`) exit `0` on any successfully
loaded input and signal concerns only through stderr warnings — this is deliberate and normative, not a bug.

> **G8 — Analysis-verb vocabulary: `lint` judges what you wrote; `check` verifies what is** *(owner-adjudicated)*.

Author: maybe `status` is better than `check` here? It has a stronger sense of "tell me the state" vs. "perform an analysis"

Author: Adopted — trust status. G8 rewritten: 'lint judges what you wrote; status reports what is', with git/systemctl exit-code prior art keeping it gate-safe; check joins the reserved-verbs list.

`lint` is **advisory static analysis of an authored artifact** (a profile file): opinions about a document,

> never a verdict — and it always exits `0`, because its baseline (this machine's `config.json` defaults) is

Author: can we use yaml instead of json for structured config everywhere? It's more token efficient and allows for comments

Author: Ruled and recorded: YAML-first for structured config artifacts (profiles, config) — comments + token efficiency; JSON accepted during migration; migration filed as a work item (it touches the landed profile loader).

- **E1 — Spec-diff-in-PR.** A PR that adds, removes, or changes a command/subcommand/flag/exit-code **must**
  edit §1.1 and, if it bends a rule, §1.3 in the same PR. A surface change without a spec diff is an
  automatic review block. This is what makes drift visible as a reviewable diff rather than an archaeological
  finding.
- **E2 — Deprecation path.** A removed or renamed flag/command survives one minor release as a hidden alias
  emitting a stderr deprecation notice (never on stdout — G4), then is removed at the next minor. Renames land
  the new spelling and the alias together.
- **E3 — Cross-implementation enforcement.** The native and TS CLIs are one surface; `crates/vaultkeeper-
  conformance` is the mechanical proof of it. Every new command lands with conformance cases so the two CLIs
  cannot diverge — the surface is enforced by test, not by discipline.

---

## Part 2 — Library Surface

### 2.1 Organizing principles (SHOULD BE, normative)

- **L1 — Everything through `index.ts`.** The public API is exactly the re-exports of `src/index.ts`; a
  symbol not re-exported is not public regardless of file visibility. API Extractor's report is the mechanical

>   witness (§2.5).

Author: Please call out "no subpath exports" explicitly (at least for TS)

Author: Added as an explicit principle: no subpath exports — the package root is the only entry point.

- **L2 — Capability-token opacity.** A `CapabilityToken` exposes no readable secret: the secret is reachable
  only through a one-time `SecretAccessor.read()`, a signing key never egresses (sign happens backend-side),
  and passing the wrong token kind to `getSecret`/`sign` is a typed refusal. This opacity is a load-bearing
  security property, not an ergonomic detail — no future API may add a token accessor that returns claims.
- **L3 — Typed failures only.** Every thrown error is a subclass of `VaultError`. Plain `Error` is never
  thrown across the public boundary; new failure modes add a `VaultError` subclass, exported from `index.ts`.
- **L4 — Minimal runtime dependency.** The `vaultkeeper` TS library's only runtime dependency is `jose`;
  `@vaultkeeper/wasm` has none. New runtime deps require explicit owner approval (recorded in CLAUDE.md).
- **L5 — Wire and type discipline.** Config/claim JSON is camelCase; public option shapes are

>   `exactOptionalPropertyTypes`-safe (no `undefined`-assignable optionals); no `as` casts in the surface.

Author: Please add a TypeScript compiler support policy (and a testing matrix to match it). Latest TS 5 minor, latest TS 6 minor, latest TS 7 minor and `@latest`. We should have a non-blocking CI run against TS nightly

Author: Added: TS support policy (latest minor of each supported major + typescript@latest) with a matching CI matrix and a non-blocking nightly lane.

### 2.2 The surface by concept (IS)

The 88 `@public` symbols group into coherent concepts. The owner reviews whether each grouping is complete and
whether membership is intentional.

- **Entry & lifecycle:** `VaultKeeper` (the façade class), `VaultKeeper.init`, `VaultKeeperOptions`,

>   `VaultResponse`.

Author: What's a `VaultResponse`? Let's align on our nouns and verbs here. `Vault` has a very specific meaning on some adjacent tools (e.g. 1Password)

Author: It's the operation-metadata wrapper returned by sign() and friends — accretion-named, and colliding with both 1Password's vault noun and our own glossary. Flagged for rename at the tiering pass; the final name comes from the glossary, not ad hoc.

> - **Setup / identity / trust:** `setup`, `SetupOptions` (a discriminated union enforcing exactly one of

Author: what do we mean by `setup`? Is this one time initialization for the user? Application start for the library author?

Author: Clarified normatively: setup() is per-process initialization by the embedding application — not user onboarding (that's config init). The name itself joins the workshop list.

  `executablePath`/`skipTrust` — a craft high point, keep as the pattern), `SetupOptionsBase`,

>   `approveExecutable`, `checkExecutableTrust`, `setDevelopmentMode`, `ExecutableTrustStatus`,

Author: I'm not sure I love the naming of "development mode". We should workshop this

Author: Marked for workshop — no surface change until the name is settled.

  `ExecutableTrustRequiredError`, `IdentityMismatchError`.

> - **Secrets & access tokens:** `store`, `delete`, `secretExists`, `authorize`, `getSecret`, `CapabilityToken`,

Author: Let's make sure we match the CLI terminology here (e.g. I think we had "redeem"). We want _ubiquitous language_

Author: Aligned — the library concept rows now use redeem and the rest of the CLI vocabulary (ubiquitous language sweep applied across Part 2).

  `SecretAccessor`, `SecretTokenMap`, `AccessorConsumedError`, `SecretNotFoundError`.

> - **Delegated access patterns:** `fetch`, `exec`, `FetchRequest`, `ExecRequest`, `ExecResult`,

Author: `exec` need to update to `run` to match CLI

Author: Updated to run.

  `redactSecrets`, `REDACTED`, `FetchError`, `ExecError`.
- **Signing & leases:** `createSigningKey`, `authorizeSigningKey`, `sign`, `exportPublicKey`,
  `VaultKeeper.verify`, `SigningAlgorithm`, `SigningPublicKey`, `SignRequest`, `SignResult`, `VerifyRequest`,
  `SigningBackend`, `isSigningBackend`, and the signing error family.
- **Backends & registry:** `SecretBackend`, `ListableBackend`, `PresenceCapableBackend`, `BackendRegistry`,
  `BackendConfig`, `BackendFactory`, `BackendSetupFactory`, `BackendCapabilities`, `getBackendCapabilities`,
  `isListableBackend`, `isPresenceCapableBackend`, `defaultBackendType`, `platformNativeBackendType`,
  `PresenceOperation`, `PresenceRequirementOptions`, the `Setup*` interactive types (`SetupQuestion`,
  `SetupChoice`, `SetupResult`).
- **Config & platform:** `VaultConfig`, `loadConfig`, `getDefaultConfigDir`, `getPlatformDefaultConfigDir`,
  `TrustTier`, `KeyStatus`, `Platform`.
- **Doctor:** `runDoctor` / `VaultKeeper.doctor`, `RunDoctorOptions`, `PreflightResult`, `PreflightCheck`,
  `ScopedPreflightCheck`, `PreflightCheckError`, `PreflightCheckErrorKind`, `PreflightCheckStatus`.

> - **Error hierarchy:** `VaultError` plus ~30 subclasses — the sole failure surface (L3).

Author: Add an `UnreachableError` that accepts a `never` in its constructor for use in exhaustive conditionals (at least in TS)

Author: Added to the designed error surface: UnreachableError with a never-typed constructor — missed union arms become compile errors at the switch site.

**Completeness gap (BROKEN-L1):** there is **no profile / resolution surface in the TS library** — profile
schema and `resolve_profile` live in `vaultkeeper-core` (and are reaching the CLI), but the embedding library
persona (§2.4) has no typed entry point to load a profile or materialize a resolved environment. Under
single-core consolidation (#234) this should surface as a host-layer API over the core. **Flag: design it,
don't let it arrive by accretion when a consumer files for it.**

> ### 2.3 Stability tiers (BROKEN — the accretion finding)

Author: Let's consider using [these tools](https://github.com/mike-north/api-extractor-tools/tree/main/tools/change-detector) to actually define a breaking change policy and _test against it_

Author: Adopted — a defined breaking-change policy tested in CI via @api-extractor-tools/change-detector, recorded in the enforcement section; CI adoption filed as a work item.

**IS: 88 `@public`, 0 `@beta`, 0 `@alpha`.** The entire surface is committed-stable by default. That is
accretion, not craft: a symbol is `@public` because it was exported, not because it was chosen for a 1.0
compatibility promise. **SHOULD BE:**

> - `@public` — a 1.0 compatibility commitment; breaking it is a major-version event.

Author: ```suggestion
- `@public` — conventional SemVer stability commitment; breaking it is a major-version event.
```

Author: Applied as suggested.

| `redactSecrets` / `REDACTED` | Internal helper or public utility? | `@public` — useful to embedders scrubbing their own logs; keep. |

The tiering pass is a **pre-1.0 gate**: freezing 88 symbols as `@public` without this review commits us to
compatibility on surface we never deliberately chose.

### 2.4 Integration personas (SHOULD BE)

| Persona (product brief) | Primary surface | Status |
|---|---|---|
| **Tool user** (unmodified tool via CLI) | Part 1 — `run`/`exec`/`store`/`profile` | served (pending `run`) |
| **Library / tool author** (embeds vaultkeeper) | `VaultKeeper` façade + access patterns + `SecretBackend` for a custom store | served for secrets/signing; **gap: profile resolution (§2.2 BROKEN-L1)** |
| **Backend author** (new OS/store) | `SecretBackend` + `BackendRegistry` + `Setup*` + capability/signing extension interfaces | served; stabilize `Setup*` (§2.3) |
| **Redemption-endpoint consumer** (future, any language) | — | **no designed entry point.** The local redemption socket (env-epic §7) is the intended home; until it is specced, this persona has no surface. **Flag, do not improvise.** |

### 2.5 Governance loop (SHOULD BE)

Two gates, one rule.

> - **Mechanical gate (exists):** the per-package `api-report/*.api.md` is regenerated and diff-checked in CI; a

Author: api report _per maturity stage_ (internal, alpha, beta, public). We should consider using @api-extractor-tools/change-detector in CI

Author: Adopted — API report per maturity stage (internal/alpha/beta/public) with change-detector gating each stage's rules.

  **integrate, do not duplicate**: the fingerprint script asserts the *set* of wasm exports; the
  `@vaultkeeper/wasm` `api-report` covers the *TS* shape; `cargo public-api` need only cover the native Rust
  crate. State this three-way split in the spec so no one adds a redundant fourth check.
- **Artifact + script:** a committed `crates/vaultkeeper-core/public-api.txt`; `pnpm check:rust-api`
  regenerates into a temp file and diffs (CI-enforced, exactly like `check:api-report`); `pnpm
  generate:rust-api` updates the committed file.
- **Operational cost, stated honestly:** `cargo public-api` builds rustdoc JSON, which requires a **pinned
  nightly toolchain**. Pin it in a toolchain file (the repo already pins the wasm toolchain — same pattern,
  precedent exists), so the snapshot is deterministic and a nightly bump is a deliberate, reviewed event.

### 3.2 CLI help-text snapshots (SHOULD BE)

`--help` output is the CLI's *rendered* surface — the wording a user reads. A flag rename, a description
edit, or a reordered subcommand is invisible to the api-report gates but is a real surface change. Golden

> help snapshots make every such change a reviewable diff that fails CI until deliberately regenerated.

Author: I think we should make sure we get _argument and flag types_ as part of --help if we're going to use snapshots in this way

Author: Added: --help must render argument and flag types (e.g. --ttl <SECONDS>), so the snapshots pin typed surface, not just names.

- **Coverage:** `--help` for the top-level command and **every** subcommand, for both CLIs while the TS one
  lives (its retirement removes its snapshots, itself a reviewable diff).
- **Host: dedicated golden files, not the conformance corpus.** The conformance corpus is behavior cases
  (argv/stdin → stdout/exit); help text is large multi-line rendered output better held as one golden file
  per command, mirroring the `docs/api/` generate-and-diff pattern. Layout:
  `crates/vaultkeeper-cli/tests/help/<command-path>.txt` (e.g. `session-mint.txt`).
- **Determinism (the real engineering point):** clap renders width-dependently and embeds the crate version.
  The regen and check **must** pin rendering: set a fixed terminal width (`COLUMNS`/clap `.term_width(80)`)
  and **normalize the version token** to a placeholder (`<VERSION>`) before writing/diffing, so a version bump
  or a CI terminal-width difference does not spuriously fail the gate. Without this the snapshots flap and get
  disabled — specify it or the gate rots.
- **Script:** `pnpm generate:cli-help` writes the goldens; `pnpm check:cli-help` regenerates to temp and
  diffs. CI-enforced.

> ### 3.3 Product glossary (NORMATIVE — owner-authored)

Author: I want you to write some sentences that use this language as a test to see whether it flows or whether the words make sense when put together.

Author: Written — a 'Vocabulary in use' subsection with six sentences now lives beside the glossary; they flow, and sentence six actually reads better under your trust-status suggestion, which supported adopting it.

API type names, claim fields). Drafted here from the de-facto usage in code and the frozen specs; **the owner
edits and ratifies each line.** Tensions are flagged **⚠ OWNER-DECIDES**, not resolved silently.

| Term | Definition | Sanctioned surface names | Notes / tension |
|---|---|---|---|
| **vaultkeeper** | The product and the semantic core. | product name; `VaultKeeper` (the orchestrator class) | ⚠ OWNER-DECIDES: is bare **"vault"** a sanctioned noun for the product, or only in compounds (`vault key`)? And is **"keeper"** ever standalone? *Rec:* product = "vaultkeeper"; `VaultKeeper` = the type; "vault" only adjectivally. |
| **secret** | The protected value at rest/in a backend. | `secret` (CLI noun, see B2); `materialize: "secret"`; `SecretBackend`, `SecretNotFoundError` | ⚠ OWNER-DECIDES: **secret vs value.** `store(name, value)` uses "value" for the raw string. *Rec:* "secret" is the domain noun; "value" only as the raw-string parameter. |
| **lease** | A serialized, expiring, revocable capability presented back to the issuer to redeem. | `session` (CLI); `materialize: "lease"`; "session signing lease" | House term (env-epic rev 5). See mint/redeem/revoke. |

> | **token** | A wire-form credential (compact JWE) or the opaque in-process handle to authorized claims. | `--token` (CLI `exec`); `CapabilityToken` (the handle); "JWE token" | ⚠ OWNER-DECIDES: **token vs lease vs capability.** *Rec:* "token" = the JWE wire form + the opaque `CapabilityToken` handle; "lease" = the expiring/revocable capability as an issued artifact. A redeemed lease is *held as* a `CapabilityToken`. Consider whether `CapabilityToken` should read `LeaseHandle`. |

Author: I like the idea of using `LeaseToken`

Author: Ratified — LeaseToken is the wire-form type name (token = wire form per the earlier ruling); CapabilityToken renames in the tiering batch.

| **capability** | The abstract authority a token/lease confers; separately, a backend's advertised security feature. | `CapabilityToken`; `BackendCapabilities`, `backend capabilities` (CLI) | ⚠ OWNER-DECIDES: two senses (conferred authority vs backend feature-set) share the word. *Rec:* keep both, documented; they never co-occur ambiguously. |
| **grant** | — | **BANNED as a vaultkeeper term** (retired for "lease", env-epic rev 5). | ⚠ OWNER-DECIDES the exception: "grant" is 1Password's own term for its Mach-port authorization (consolidation §2). *Rec:* allowed **only** when describing 1Password's external mechanism; never for a vaultkeeper artifact. Banned-terms lint (§3.4) encodes this scope. |

> | **mint / redeem / revoke** | The lease lifecycle verbs: create, present-to-use, kill. | `session mint`, `session redeem` (designed), `session revoke` | ⚠ OWNER-DECIDES: **mint vs issue vs create.** *Rec:* "mint" canonical (matches the minting-key term below). |

Author: `issue` is what we decided on I think

Author: Fixed — issue (a stale mint survived in that row).
